## A ‘helicase handover’ mechanism for selective lncRNA incorporation into the Dosage Compensation Complex

The dosage compensation complex (DCC) of Drosophila melanogaster is a paradigmatic, multi-enzyme chromatin regulator, which doubles the transcriptional output from the single male X chromosome to match the combined output of the two X’s in females. The assembly of two long non-coding RNAs roX1/roX2 with five male-specific-lethal (MSL) proteins is crucial for DCC function. Amongst the DCC subunits, the DExH helicase maleless (MLE) is best-characterized for its interaction with roX RNAs. Structural studies revealed surprising specificity of MLE for uridines, rationalizing the conservation of uridine-rich motifs in critical roX substrates. Exposing these motifs by MLE is hypothesized to recruit MSL proteins and to assemble the DCC. However, how roX RNA is recognized and integrated into the complex remains elusive. To define RNA-binding principles of the DCC, we developed vitRIP-Seq, a simple and versatile in vitro transcriptome-binding assay. vitRIP-Seq allows to identify intrinsic RNA-binding specificities of purified proteins in context of the full transcriptome, without the impact of extrinsic cellular factors. We subjected MLE to vitRIP-Seq and observed that it not only binds to both roX RNAs with high affinity, but also to a number of coding and non-coding RNAs with a bias towards the 3’ end. MLE-bound RNAs are enriched in poly-uridine stretches, resembling the nucleobase specificity observed in the crystal structure. In contrast, vitRIP-Seq of the reconstituted DCC core complex lacking the helicase subunit revealed promiscuous binding to multiple RNA species and no preference for roX2. In presence of MLE and ATP, however, the DCC specifically enriches roX2 from the transcriptome. Within the DCC core, we identified the MSL1/MSL2 module to be essential for recruiting and binding roX2-loaded MLE. The data suggest a cooperation of MLE and MSL1/MSL2 for specific incorporation of roX2 into the DCC. 

## Design
RNA-seq of in vitro and in vivo RIP experiments. IP and Input samples in at least 2 biological replicates per condition.

## Links

